Changelog v0.29.0 (#17)
meilisearch/core-team: meilisearch-release-changelog/v0.29.0.md

# v0.29.0 release changelogs

> In this release, we integrate a really demanded feature: the possibility to custom the relevancy during the search. We also made a lot of improvements regarding the indexing speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this release, we integrate a really demanded feature: the possibility to require that all query terms are present in search results. Some users have been stuck in the pre-0.21 versions due to that. We also made a lot of improvements regarding the indexing speed.
```

I think it could be more direct and precise, it's just a suggestion.

Author: Integrated manually

<!-- The following line should NOT be put in the official release changelogs -->
⚠️ Since this is a release candidate (RC), the official documentation is not updated yet, but will be ready for the official v0.29.0 release. The work-in-progress documentation is available [here]().

# New features and improvements 🔥

> ## Matching customization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Customize matching strategy
```

> It's now possible to control the relevancy behavior during the search by choosing to return only documents containing ALL the query words.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's now possible to control how Meilisearch matches documents during a search by choosing to return only documents containing ALL the query words.
```

Author: Integrated manually

How to activate it?

```bash
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "american ninja", "matchingStrategy": "all" }'
```

> Here Meilisearch will return only documents containing "american" AND "ninja".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here Meilisearch will only return documents containing "american" AND "ninja".
```

> By default, Meilisaearch still returns documents containing all the query words, then documents that don't contain all the query words.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Meilisearch still returns documents containing all the query words, then documents that don't contain all the query words.
```

> By default, Meilisaearch still returns documents containing all the query words, then documents that don't contain all the query words.

Author: Integrated manually

<!-- The following line should only be put in the official release changelogs, not for the RC -->
Check out the [documentation]().

Made by @ManyTheFish in #2578 and meilisearch/milli#598.

## Thai language support

The Thai language is now supported 🇹🇭

If your language is missing in Meilisearch, please consider contributing to the [Meilisearch tokenizer](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia) by following the CONTRIBUTING.md file and integrating your intended normalizer/segmenter.

The whole core team is available to help you contribute. Feel free to ask for any clarifications you need!

Made by our dear contributor @aFluffyHotdog and by @ManyTheFish in meilisearch/charabia#114, meilisearch/charabia#115, meilisearch/milli##611, and #2636.

> ## Performance improvements for indexing

Reviewer: WDYT to explain the soft deletion and short-circuit permitting to not re-index the same document?

Author: Hum not sure I want to make the README heavier for something we want to make transparent for the users. I would rather add metrics when we will have ones 😄 
However I will link your issues

Reviewer 3: Agree with @curquiza on this one.

We made a lot of indexing speed improvements, especially on the `filterableAttributes` indexing and the document update and deletion.

Made by @loiclec and @irevoire in #2689, #2690, meilisearch/milli#607, meilisearch/milli#606, meilisearch/milli#587, meilisearch/milli#557,meilisearch/milli#579, and meilisearch/milli#590.

## Filtering: introduce the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators

> Using the `filter` search parameter during [the search](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/search.html#search-in-an-index-with-post-route), it's now possible to use the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now use the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators with the `filter` search parameter during [search](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/search.html#search-in-an-index-with-post-route).
```

With the following set of documents:

```json
{ "id": 1, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 20, "color": "yellow" }
{ "id": 2, "product": "T-shirt",              "color": "red" }
{ "id": 3, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 30 }
{ "id": 4, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 40 }
```

> - The filter `price EXISTS` will select the documents `1`, `3`, `4`.
> - The filter `price IN [30, 20]` will select the documents `1` and `3`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The filter `price EXISTS` will select documents `1`, `3`, and `4`.
- The filter `price IN [30, 20]` will select documents `1` and `3`.
```

These operators can be combined with the already existing `NOT` (`!=`) operator.

> More about [the filtering](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/getting_started/filtering_and_sorting.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More about [filtering](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/getting_started/filtering_and_sorting.html).
```

Made by @loiclec in #2636, meilisearch/milli#596, and meilisearch/milli#556.

## Key management

> When managing [the keys](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/security/master_api_keys.html#protecting-a-meilisearch-instance), the `*` is now available in the `actions` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When managing [the keys](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/security/master_api_keys.html#protecting-a-meilisearch-instance), the `*` helper is now available to express a set of actions in the `actions` field.

e.g instead of specifying `indexes.create`, `indexes.get`, `indexes.update`, `indexes.delete`; it's now possible to specify `indexes.*`
```

Author: Integrated manually!

> When managing [the keys](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/security/master_api_keys.html#protecting-a-meilisearch-instance), the `*` is now available in the `actions` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When managing [keys](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/security/master_api_keys.html#protecting-a-meilisearch-instance), the `*` operator can now be used with all actions in the `actions` array.
```

Made by our dear contributors @Mcdostone and @phdavis1027 in #2080 and #2579.

## Meilisearch metrics - Beta

> We integrate a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) formatted metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We integrate a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) formatted metrics endpoint.
```

Author: Integrated manually

> We integrate a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) formatted metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We integrated [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) formatted metrics.
```

You can activate it by launching Meilisearch using the `--enable-metrics-route` (or setting the `MEILI_ENABLE_METRICS_ROUTE` env variable) and calling the `GET /metrics` route.

> This feature is a beta feature because a first step of a bigger [issue "Ease observability"](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/issues/496): we need to ensure the current metrics we provide are useful before making it stable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a beta feature for now. We first need to ensure the [current metrics we provide are useful](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/issues/496) before making it stable.
```

Made by @pavo-tusker in #2657.

# Behavior changes ⚠️

## Auto-batching

> This previous experimental feature is now activated by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This previously experimental feature is now activated by default.
```

For people who activated in the previous version using `--enable-auto-batching`, you need to remove this flag when running Meilisearch. All the previous settings have been removed (`--debounce-duration-sec`, `--max-batch-size` and `--max-documents-per-batch`).

> For people who hadn't activated it, it does not change anything but increase the indexing speed 🏎️

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For people who hadn't activated it, it does not change anything but increases the indexing speed 🏎️
```

If there is any trouble during your indexation, the `--disable-auto-batching` (or the environment variable `MEILI_DISABLE_AUTO_BATCHING`) flag is available.

Made by @Kerollmops in meilisearch/milli#561, #2523, and #2677.

## `!=` (`NOT`) filter operator

> This behavior change is consistent with the `EXISTS` and `IN` operator introduction. The `NOT` filter now also matches documents that don't have the related attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This behavior change is consistent with the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators. The `NOT` filter now also matches documents that don't have the related attributes.
```

More explanation with examples [here](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/2486).

Made by @loiclec in #2636, and meilisearch/milli#596.

# Fixes 🐞

* Clamp databases max size to a multiple of system page size (#2662) @ManyTheFish
* Prevent removing whitespace trimming during document id validation (#2636 and meilisearch/milli#599) @ManyTheFish
* Support https in `print_launch_resume` (#2664) @evpeople
* Filters can not accept unquoted reserved keywords as field names/values (#2636 and meilisearch/milli#596) @loiclec
* Fix filtering selection (#2636 and meilisearch/milli#568) @GraDKh

# Misc

> * Rework completely the README (#2504) @CaroFG, @curquiza, @guimachiavelli, and @gmourier

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Completely rework the README (#2504) @CaroFG, @curquiza, @guimachiavelli, and @gmourier
```

> * Add analytics on the stats routes (#2674) @irevoire

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add analytics to the `/stats` routes (#2674) @irevoire
```

# v0.29.0 release changelogs

<!-- The following line should NOT be put in the official release changelogs -->
⚠️ Since this is a release candidate (RC), we do NOT recommend using this version in production. This is only for test purposes. Please, feel free to [report bugs](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/new/choose) and [give feedback about the new feature introductions](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions).

> In this release, we integrated a demanded feature: requiring all query terms to be present in search results. Some users have been stuck in the pre-0.21 versions because of this.
> We also improved the indexing speed

Reviewer 3: Minor wording change for better text flow, plus integrating that hanging sentence into the paragraph.

```suggestion
This release includes a much requested feature: an option to require all query terms to be present in search results. The absence of this feature prevented some users from upgrading to newer Meilisearch versions. Additionally, v0.29 contains several indexing speed improvements.
```

> 🧰 Most of the integrations (SDKs, clients, libraries) you use will be compatible with this version in the 4 next hours following the release. Sometimes it can take longer, maybe 24h, depending on some issues we can encounter during the release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
🧰 Most integrations (SDKs, clients, libraries) will be compatible with this version within four hours of the release. Sometimes it can take longer, maybe 24 hours, depending on the issues we can encounter during the release.
```

> However, here is the exhaustive list of the NON-compatible integrations with v0.29.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, here is the exhaustive list of **non-compatible** integrations with v0.29.0:
```

> - [meilisearch-dart](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-dart) and [meilisearch-swift](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-swift): you can use it with v0.29.0 but the [`matchingStrategy` feature](#customize-matching-strategy) is not integrated yet. If you really need it, let us know, and of course, contributions are welcome!
> - [meilisearch-java](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-java): our team is still working on refactoring the code, and the SDK cannot be used with v0.29.0. Follow the repository to know when it will be compatible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [meilisearch-dart](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-dart) and [meilisearch-swift](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-swift): You can use it with v0.29.0 but the [`matchingStrategy` feature](#customize-matching-strategy) is not integrated yet. Let us know if you really need it, and contributions are always welcome!
- [meilisearch-java](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-java): Our team is still working on refactoring the code, and the SDK cannot be used with v0.29.0. Follow the repository to know when it will be compatible.
```

<!-- The following line should NOT be put in the official release changelogs -->

> 📖 the official documentation is not updated yet, but will be ready for the official v0.29.0 release. The work-in-progress documentation is available [here]().

Reviewer: ```suggestion
📖 The official documentation is not updated yet, but will be ready for the official v0.29.0 release. The work-in-progress documentation is available [here]().
```

> 📖 the official documentation is not updated yet, but will be ready for the official v0.29.0 release. The work-in-progress documentation is available [here]().

Reviewer: ```suggestion
📖 The official documentation is not updated yet, but will be ready for the official v0.29.0 release. The work-in-progress documentation is available [here]().
```

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Customize matching strategy

> It's now possible to control how Meilisearch matches documents during search by choosing to return only documents containing **all** the query words.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is now possible to control how Meilisearch matches documents during search by choosing to return only documents containing **all** query terms.
```

### How to activate it?

```bash
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "american ninja", "matchingStrategy": "all" }'
```

> Here Meilisearch will only return documents containing "american" AND "ninja".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By setting `"matchingStrategy": "all"` In the above example, we ensure Meilisearch will only return documents containing both "american" AND "ninja".
```

> By default, Meilisearch will still return documents containing all the query words, followed by documents that don't contain all the query words.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Meilisearch's default matching strategy is `last`. It will still return documents containing all the query words, followed by documents that don't contain all the query words.
```

<!-- The following line should only be put in the official release changelogs, not for the RC -->

> Check out the [documentation]().

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Check out the [documentation for more information on `matchingStrategy`](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/search.html#matching-strategy).
```

Made by @ManyTheFish in #2578 and meilisearch/milli#598.

## Thai language support

> Thai is now supported 🇹🇭

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Meilisearch now offers optimized support for Thai 🇹🇭
```

> If your language is missing in Meilisearch, please consider contributing to the [Meilisearch tokenizer](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia) by following the CONTRIBUTING.md file and integrating your intended normalizer/segmenter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Want optimized support for your language? Consider contributing to the [Meilisearch tokenizer](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia) by following the CONTRIBUTING.md file and integrating your intended normalizer/segmenter.
```

> The whole core team is available to help you contribute. Feel free to ask for any clarifications!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The core team is always happy to help our contributor. Do drop us a line if you need us to clarify anything!
```

Made by our dear contributor @aFluffyHotdog and by @ManyTheFish in meilisearch/charabia#114, meilisearch/charabia#115, meilisearch/milli##611, and #2636.

## Performance improvements for indexing

> We improved the indexing speed, especially for `filterableAttributes` and document update and deletion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We improved Meilisearch's indexing speed, especially for indexes using `filterableAttributes` and when updating and deleting documents.
```

For more information on the main improvements, check out the following issues: meilisearch/product#513 and meilisearch/product#520.

Made by @loiclec and @irevoire in #2689, #2690, meilisearch/milli#607, meilisearch/milli#606, meilisearch/milli#587, meilisearch/milli#557,meilisearch/milli#579, and meilisearch/milli#590.

## Filtering: introduce the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators

You can now use the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators with the `filter` search parameter during [search](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/search.html#search-in-an-index-with-post-route).

With the following set of documents:

```json
{ "id": 1, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 20, "color": "yellow" }
{ "id": 2, "product": "T-shirt",              "color": "red" }
{ "id": 3, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 30 }
{ "id": 4, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 40 }
```

- The filter `price EXISTS` will select documents `1`, `3`, and `4`.
- The filter `price IN [30, 20]` will select documents `1` and `3`.

These operators can be combined with the existing `NOT` (`!=`) operator.

> More about [filtering](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/getting_started/filtering_and_sorting.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Read more about [filtering in Meilisearch's documentation](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/getting_started/filtering_and_sorting.html).
```

Made by @loiclec in #2636, meilisearch/milli#596, and meilisearch/milli#556.

## Key management

When managing [keys](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/security/master_api_keys.html#protecting-a-meilisearch-instance), the `*` helper can now be used to express a set of actions in the `actions` array.

For example, instead of specifying `indexes.create`, `indexes.get`, `indexes.update`, `indexes.delete`; you can now use `indexes.*`.

Made by our dear contributors @Mcdostone and @phdavis1027 in #2080 and #2579.

# Behavior changes ⚠️

## Auto-batching

> This previously experimental feature is now activated by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This previously experimental feature is now enabled by default.
```

> For people who activated it in previous versions using `--enable-auto-batching`, you need to remove this flag when running Meilisearch. All the previous settings (`--debounce-duration-sec`, `--max-batch-size` and `--max-documents-per-batch`) have been removed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you enabled auto-batching in previous versions using `--enable-auto-batching`, remove this flag when running Meilisearch v0.29.0. All other auto-batching settings (`--debounce-duration-sec`, `--max-batch-size`, and `--max-documents-per-batch`) have been removed.
```

> For people who hadn't activated it, it does not change anything but increases the indexing speed 🏎️

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you did not enable auto-batching before, the transition should be seamless and increase indexing speed 🏎️
```

> If there are any issues during indexing, the `--disable-auto-batching` flag (or the environment variable `MEILI_DISABLE_AUTO_BATCHING`) is available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you experience any issues during indexing, try using `--disable-auto-batching` flag (or the environment variable `MEILI_DISABLE_AUTO_BATCHING`).
```

Made by @Kerollmops in meilisearch/milli#561, #2523, and #2677.

## `!=` (`NOT`) filter operator

> This behavior change is consistent with the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators. The `NOT` filter now also matches documents that don't have the related attributes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This behavior change is consistent with the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators. The `NOT` filter now also matches documents missing the specified attributes.
```

More explanation with examples [here](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/2486).

Made by @loiclec in #2636, and meilisearch/milli#596.

# Fixes 🐞

> * Clamp databases max size to a multiple of system page size (#2662) @ManyTheFish

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Clamp max size of databases to a multiple of system page size (#2662) @ManyTheFish
```

> * Prevent removing whitespace trimming during document id validation (#2636 and meilisearch/milli#599) @ManyTheFish

Reviewer 3: I think there's an extra verb here? Otherwise I'm not sure I understand this one.

```suggestion
* Prevent whitespace trimming during document id validation (#2636 and meilisearch/milli#599) @ManyTheFish
```

* Support https in `print_launch_resume` (#2664) @evpeople

> * Filters can not accept unquoted reserved keywords as field names/values (#2636 and meilisearch/milli#596) @loiclec

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Filters: reserved keywords must wrapped in quotation marks when used field names/values  (#2636 and meilisearch/milli#596) @loiclec
```

* Fix filtering selection (#2636 and meilisearch/milli#568) @GraDKh

# Misc

* Completely rework the README (#2504) @CaroFG, @curquiza, @guimachiavelli, and @gmourier
* Add analytics to the `/stats` routes (#2674) @irevoire
* Update link to Cloud beta form (#2625) @davelarkan

> * Internal feature only: integrate `/metrics` route (#2657) @pavo-tusker

Reviewer 3: I think we can drop the "only" here.

```suggestion
* Internal feature: integrate `/metrics` route (#2657) @pavo-tusker
```

# v0.29.0 release changelogs

> In this release, we integrate a demanded feature: the possibility to require that all query terms are present in search results. Some users have been stuck in the pre-0.21 versions due to that.
> We also made a lot of improvements regarding the indexing speed!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this release, we integrated a demanded feature: all query terms being present in search results. Some users have been stuck in the pre-0.21 versions because of this.
 We also improved the indexing speed!
```

Author: ```suggestion
In this release, we integrated a demanded feature: all query terms being present in search results. Some users have been stuck in the pre-0.21 versions because of this.
We also improved the indexing speed
```

<!-- The following line should NOT be put in the official release changelogs -->
⚠️ Since this is a release candidate (RC), the official documentation is not updated yet, but will be ready for the official v0.29.0 release. The work-in-progress documentation is available [here]().

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Customize matching strategy

> It's now possible to control ow Meilisearch matches documents during the search by choosing to return only documents containing **all** the query words.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's now possible to control how Meilisearch matches documents during search by choosing to return only documents containing **all** the query words.
```

  --data-binary '{ "q": "american ninja", "matchingStrategy": "all" }'
```

Here Meilisearch will only return documents containing "american" AND "ninja".

By default, Meilisearch will still return documents containing all the query words, followed by documents that don't contain all the query words.

<!-- The following line should only be put in the official release changelogs, not for the RC -->
Check out the [documentation]().

Made by @ManyTheFish in #2578 and meilisearch/milli#598.

## Thai language support

Thai is now supported 🇹🇭

If your language is missing in Meilisearch, please consider contributing to the [Meilisearch tokenizer](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia) by following the CONTRIBUTING.md file and integrating your intended normalizer/segmenter.

The whole core team is available to help you contribute. Feel free to ask for any clarifications!

Made by our dear contributor @aFluffyHotdog and by @ManyTheFish in meilisearch/charabia#114, meilisearch/charabia#115, meilisearch/milli##611, and #2636.

## Performance improvements for indexing

We improved the indexing speed, especially for `filterableAttributes` and document update and deletion.

> For people wanting information about the main improvements, check out the following issues: meilisearch/product#513 and meilisearch/product#520.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information on the main improvements, check out the following issues: meilisearch/product#513 and meilisearch/product#520.
```

Made by @loiclec and @irevoire in #2689, #2690, meilisearch/milli#607, meilisearch/milli#606, meilisearch/milli#587, meilisearch/milli#557,meilisearch/milli#579, and meilisearch/milli#590.

## Filtering: introduce the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators

You can now use the `EXISTS` and `IN` operators with the `filter` search parameter during [search](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/search.html#search-in-an-index-with-post-route).

With the following set of documents:

```json
{ "id": 1, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 20, "color": "yellow" }
{ "id": 2, "product": "T-shirt",              "color": "red" }
{ "id": 3, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 30 }
{ "id": 4, "product": "T-shirt", "price": 40 }
```

- The filter `price EXISTS` will select documents `1`, `3`, and `4`.
- The filter `price IN [30, 20]` will select documents `1` and `3`.

> These operators can be combined with the already existing `NOT` (`!=`) operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These operators can be combined with the existing `NOT` (`!=`) operator.
```

More about [filtering](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/getting_started/filtering_and_sorting.html).

Made by @loiclec in #2636, meilisearch/milli#596, and meilisearch/milli#556.

## Key management

When managing [keys](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/security/master_api_keys.html#protecting-a-meilisearch-instance), the `*` helper can now be used to express a set of actions in the `actions` array.

> For example, instead of specifying `indexes.create`, `indexes.get`, `indexes.update`, `indexes.delete`; it's now possible to specify `indexes.*`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, instead of specifying `indexes.create`, `indexes.get`, `indexes.update`, `indexes.delete`; you can now use `indexes.*`.
```

Made by our dear contributors @Mcdostone and @phdavis1027 in #2080 and #2579.

## Meilisearch metrics - Beta

> We integrated [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) formatted metrics endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We integrated a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) formatted metrics endpoint.
```
